You Worry Too MuchOh soul,you worry too much.You say,I make you feel dizzy.Of a little headache then,why do you worry?You say, I am your antelope. Of seeing a lion here and there why do you worry?Oh soul,you worry too much.You say, I am your moon-faced beauty. Of the cycles of the moon andpassing of the years,why do you worry?You say, I am your source of passion,I excite you.Of playing into the Devils hand,why do you worry?Oh soul,you worry too much.Look at yourself,what you have become.You are now a field of sugar canes,why show that sour face to me?You have tamed thewinged horse of Love.Of a death of a donkey,why do you worry?You say that I keep you warm inside. Then why this cold sigh?You have gone to the roof of heavens. Of this world of dust, why do you worry?Oh soul,you worry too much.Since you met me,you have become a master singer, and are now a skilled wrangler,1
you can untangle any knot. Of life's little leashwhy do you worry?Your arms are heavywith treasures of all kinds. About poverty,why do you worry?You are Joseph,beautiful, strong,steadfast in your belief,all of Egypt has become drunk because of you.Of those who are blind to your beauty, and deaf to your songs,why do you worry?Oh soul,you worry too much.You say that your housemate is the Heart of Love,she is your best friend.You say that you are the heat of the oven of every Lover.You say that you are the servant of Ali's magical sword, Zolfaghar.Of any little daggerwhy do you still worry?Oh soul,you worry too much.You have seen your own strength. You have seen your own beauty. You have seen your golden wings. Of anything less,why do you worry?You are in truththe soul, of the soul, of the soul. You are the security,the shelter of the spirit of Lovers. Oh the sultan of sultans,of any other king,why do you worry?2
Be silent, like a fish,and go into that pleasant sea. You are in deep waters now, of life's blazing fire.Why do you worry?From: Hush Don't Say Anything to God: Passionate Poems of Rumi Translated by Sharam Shiva3
Cradle My HeartLast night,I was lying on the rooftop,thinking of you.I saw a special Star,and summoned her to take you a message.I prostrated myself to the Starand asked her to take my prostration to that Sun of Tabriz.So that with his light, he can turn my dark stones into gold.I opened my chest and showed her my scars, I told her to bring me newsof my bloodthirsty Lover.As I waited,I paced back and forth,until the child of my heart became quiet.The child slept, as if I were rocking his cradle.Oh Beloved, give milk to the infant of the heart, and don't hold us from our turning.You have cared for hundreds,don't let it stop with me now.At the end, the town of unity is the place for the heart. Why do you keep this bewildered heartin the town of dissolution?I have gone speechless, but to rid myselfof this dry mood,oh Saaqhi, pass the narcissus of the wine.From: Hush Don't Say Anything to God: Passionate Poems of Rumi Translated by Sharam Shiva4
There is a candle in your heart...There is a candle in your heart, ready to be kindled.There is a void in your soul, ready to be filled.You feel it, don't you? You feel the separationfrom the Beloved. Invite Him to fill you up,embrace the fire.Remind those who tell you otherwise thatLovecomes to you of its own accord, and the yearning for itcannot be learned in any school.From: Hush Don't Say Anything to God: Passionate Poems of Rumi Translated by Sharam Shiva5
Art as Flirtation and SurrenderIn your light I learn how to love.In your beauty, how to make poems. You dance inside my chest,where no one sees you,but sometimes I do,and that sight becomes this art.From: The Essential Rumi Translated by Coleman Barks6
Spring GiddinessToday, like every other day, we wake up emptyand frightened. Don't open the door to the studyand begin reading. Take down a musical instrument.Let the beauty we love be what we do.There are hundreds of ways to kneel and kiss the ground.The breeze at dawn has secrets to tell you. Don't go back to sleep.You must ask for what you really want. Don't go back to sleep.People are going back and forth across the doorsill where the two worlds touch.The door is round and open.Don't go back to sleep.I would love to kiss you.The price of kissing is your life.Now my loving is running toward my life shouting, What a bargain, let's buy it.Daylight, full of small dancing particlesand the one great turning, our soulsare dancing with you, without feet, they dance. Can you see them when I whisper in your ear?All day and night, music, a quiet, brightreedsong. If itfades, we fade.From: The Essential Rumi Translated by Coleman Barks7
Don't try to hold onto this ...you'll lose itDon't pull the curtain ...it will endThis moment with all of us here ...is paradise,But don't try to leave this way. ...you'll ruin it.From: The Hand of Poetry: Five Mystic Poets of Persia Translated by Coleman BarksUntitled8
This World Which Is Made of Our Love for EmptinessPraise to the emptiness that blanks out existence. Existence: This place made from our love for that emptiness!Yet somehow comes emptiness, this existence goes.Praise to that happening, over and over!For years I pulled my own existence out of emptiness.Then one swoop, one swing of the arm, that work is over.Free of who I was, free of presence, free of dangerous fear, hope, free of mountainous wanting.The here-and-now mountain is a tiny piece of a piece of straw blown off into emptiness.These words I'm saying so much begin to lose meaning: Existence, emptiness, mountain, straw:Words and what they try to say sweptout the window, down the slant of the roof.From: The Discourses of Rumi quoted from William C. Chittick, The Sufi Path of Love: The Spiritual Teachings of Rumi9
I've said before that every craftsmanI've said before that every craftsman searches for what's not thereto practice his craft.A builder looks for the rotten hole where the roof caved in. A water-carrier picks the empty pot. A carpenterstops at the house with no door.Workers rush toward some hint of emptiness, which they then start to fill. Their hope, though, is for emptiness, so don't think you must avoid it. It contains what you need!Dear soul, if you were not friendswith the vast nothing inside,why would you always be casting you net into it, and waiting so patiently?This invisible ocean has given you such abundance, but still you call it "death",that which provides you sustenance and work.God has allowed some magical reversal to occur, so that you see the scorpion pitas an object of desire,and all the beautiful expanse around it,as dangerous and swarming with snakes.This is how strange your fear of death and emptiness is, and how perverse the attachment to what you want.Now that you've heard meon your misapprehensions, dear friend, listen to Attar's story on the same subject.10
He strung the pearls of thisabout King Mahmud, how among the spoilsof his Indian campaign there was a Hindu boy, whom he adopted as a son. He educatedand provided royally for the boyand later made him vice-regent, seatedon a gold throne beside himself.One day he found the young man weeping.. "Why are you crying? You're the companionof an emperor! The entire nation is ranged out before you like stars that you can command!"The young man replied, "I am rememberingmy mother and father, and how theyscared me as a child with threats of you!'Uh-oh, he's headed for King Mahmud's court! Nothing could be more hellish!' Where are they now when they should see me sitting here?"This incident is about your fear of changing. You are the Hindu boy. Mahmud, which means Praise to the End, is the spirit'spoverty or emptiness.The mother and father are your attachment to beliefs and blood tiesand desires and comforting habits.Don't listen to them!They seem to protect but they imprison.They are your worst enemies. They make you afraidof living in emptiness.Some day you'll weep tears of delight in that court, remembering your mistaken parents!Know that your body nurtures the spirit, helps it grow, and gives it wrong advise.The body becomes, eventually, like a vest11
of chain mail in peaceful years,too hot in summer and too cold in winter.But the body's desires, in another way, are like an unpredictable associate, whom you must be patient with. And that companion is helpful, because patience expands your capacityto love and feel peace.The patience of a rose close to a thornkeeps it fragrant. It's patience that gives milk to the male camel still nursing in its third year, and patience is what the prophets show to us.The beauty of careful sewing on a shirt is the patience it contains.Friendship and loyalty have patience as the strength of their connection.Feeling lonely and ignoble indicates that you haven't been patient.Be with those who mix with Godas honey blends with milk, and say,"Anything that comes and goes,rises and sets, is notwhat I love." else you'll be like a caravan fire left to flare itself out alone beside the road.From: Rumi : One-Handed Basket Weaving Translated by Coleman Barks12
The Gazalsif the door is shutright in your facekeep waiting with patience don't leave right awayseeing your patience your love will soon summon you with grace raise you like a championand if all the roadsend up in dead endsyou'll be shown the secret paths no one will comprehend..............ah i better keep silence i know this endless love will surely arrivefor you and you and youfrom ghazal number 965if your belovedhas the life of a firestep in now and burn alongin a night full ofsuffering and darknessbe a candle spreading light till dawn...........even if you feeltorn to piecessew yourself new clothes13
your body and soulwill surely feel the joy when you simply go along........don't say what is the use of me alone being peaceful when everyone is fightingyou're not oneyou're a thousand just light your lanternsince one live flameis better thana thousand dead soulsfrom ghazal number 1197find yourself a friendwho is willing totolerate you with patienceput to the test the essence of the best incenseby putting it in firedrink a cup of poisonif handed to you by a friend when filled with love and gracestep into the firelike the chosen prophetthe secret love will changehot flames to a garden covered with blossomsroses and hyacinths and willowfrom ghazal number 99414
go my friendbestow your loveeven on your enemiesif you touch their heartswhat do you think will happenfrom ghazal number 838From: Fountain of Fire (excerpted) Translated by Nader Elkhalili15